all right so i guess we can get started
uh this is the third part of
uh the lecture on energy based models
uh which we are we're going to continue
a little bit what we talked about last
time
on sparse coding and
talk about gans very briefly you'll hear
more about it tomorrow
from alfredo and then talk about
learning world models
and similar things also about a bit of
a little bit about exotic
self-supervised and unsupervised
learning algorithms
that are kind of you know active
research topics at the moment
so one thing i talked about last time
was sparse coding
and i'm going to mention just a
very simple idea which consists in sort
of
combining uh sparse coding or the audio
sparsely encoder
with uh discriminative training so
imagine that
the architecture i'm showing you here uh
the
the encoder if you will the the first uh
part on the left is uh
mostly uh similar to the encoder i
talked about for the the lista method
so you start with the x variable you run
it through a matrix
then you run that through a
non-linearity it could be a value for
example this is the case here
and then you take the result multiplied
by
some matrix which we're going to learn
at this with the
product of the input by the encoding
matrix we
and then pass this to a non-linearity
and you can repeat this little block
this green block here multiple times
each of those is a layer basically that
consists in
a matrix or a bunch of convolutions uh
in addition with
uh some you know pre-existing variable
and a non-linearity
so this is you know a funny kind of
neural network where you have kind of
uh skipping connections
and then we're going to train this
neural network to do
uh three different things or with three
different criteria one criterion is
going to be
uh just reconstruct x okay so there's
going to be a decoding matrix that
is uh going to reproduce the input
on the output and we're going to do this
by just minimizing squared error
so this is what's indicated by the
decoding filters here
and again this could be convolutional or
not depending on which version you
you like there's going to be an l1
criterion
on the on the feature vector
that makes it sparse so this is very
much like a sparse auto encoder
of the type that we talked about last
week but then we're
also going to add a third term and this
third term is going to be
basically a a simple linear
classifier which is going to
try to predict a category okay and we're
going to
train the system to minimize all three
criteria at the same time
so this is a sparse autoencoder that
also tries to find codes that do a good
job at prediction
and this is sort of a good way you can
you can see this in two different ways
you can you can see this as
an auto encoder that is biased towards
producing good labels or you can see
this as a classifier
multi-layer classifier that is
regularized by an auto encoder
what's the advantage of this with the
advantage is that by
forcing the system to find
representations here at the second last
layer
that uh can reconstruct the input then
you're basically
biasing the system towards extracting
features that contain as much
information about the input as possible
so that sort of
makes the features richer if you want it
forces the system to
not generate degenerate features but to
generate features that contain as much
information as possible about
about the input
that works pretty well i think it's an
underexplored method
for training neural nets
um because very often we don't have
enough
uh label training data or when
the the training data is such that you
don't have a lot of categories
um to work with maybe it's a two or
three or ten classic problem
which we know tend to produce very
generic degenerate features
uh in a neural net as we discussed last
time
then forcing the system to reconstruct
basically
tells it you know you can't generate
features that are too
degenerate will sort of generate that uh
you can't reconstruct the input from it
so that's sort of a good you could think
of it as a good regularizer
okay group sparsity and structural
sparsity so there's some work
going back about 10 years maybe a little
more uh in fact the first work on this
are about 20 years old
on the idea of goose parsley what does
that mean
um here is here is the idea the idea is
to train a system to generate spice
features but not just
normal features that are extracted say
by a bunch of convolutions and values
but to basically produce part spot
features that are sparse
after the pooling okay so you
essentially have a system
that consists of convolutions
non-linearity and pooling
you try to make those features sparse
and there's a number of different work
the idea goes back to
ivarian and hoyer in 2001 uh in the
context of ica independent component
analysis
and then there were you know a few other
papers one by osindero in jeff eaton's
group
um and then karai uh truly was a student
of mine back in the
late 2000s uh carl greger who was posed
up with me
giuliana merrell who is in the in france
and a bunch of other people
on on this idea of structural space
coding so
the idea basically is you take um
uh so some of those uh models only have
an encoder some of them only have a
decoder and some of them are auto
encoders right
so the one on the left is in the airways
model is an encoder only model
julia alex model is a decoder only model
and choreographers model is
uh basically an autoencoder a space
autoencoder of the type that we talked
about last time
um so how does that work
uh let's take say an encoder only model
you have a feature extractor which
consists of convolutions or
maybe just uh fully connected uh
matrices over a patch an image patch for
example
and then instead of forcing the output
of this to be
after a non-linearity instead of forcing
that to be sparse
you you put a pulling layer and you you
force the pulling to be sparse
uh and this applies to uh all three of
those
um so here is a more specific example
this is the
the version that uh correct true uh did
for his phd this is where
he had a sparse auto encoder so you have
an encoding function g e of w
e y i it could be multiple layers in
this case it was basically just two
layers
uh with one non-linearity you have a
decoder which in this case was linear wd
times
e evaluating variable z and that agent
variable instead of going to an l1
it goes through uh basically an l2
but it's l2 over groups right so you
take a group of components of z
you compute the l2 norm not the square
to norm but the l2 norm
which means the square root of the sum
of the values
of those components uh of the square of
those components right
so take each component compute the
square and then compute the sum
of a group of those squares and then
compute the square root of that
so that's the l2 norm of that within
that group
and then you do this for multiple groups
the groups can be overlapping or
non-overlapping
and you compute the sum and that's your
regularizer that's your sparsity
regularizer so what does that
tend to do it tends to basically
turn off the maximum number of groups
okay the system basically
is sparsity on groups so it wants the
smallest number of groups to be on
at any one time but within a group
because it's an l2 norm within a group
it doesn't care how many units are on
within the group
so many units can be on within a group
so what does that do
it it forces the system basically
to group within a pool features that
turn on
simultaneously right so if you have
features that are very similar
feature extra extractors that are very
similar filters that are very similar in
a commercial net then those features
will tend to kind of
uh when you do the training they'll try
to group themselves within a group
because they will tend to be activated
together that's the best way to minimize
the number of groups that are activated
at any one time
so to get those those interesting kind
of
pictures here the way this was obtained
is by
here the groups so what you're looking
at here
are the either the uh i think it's the
decoding matrix so these are the
the the columns of the wd matrix um
that we can reconstruct an image patch
from the sparse code
by multiplying by that matrix
but what we do here is that we group
those features
into blocks of 36 so we arrange all the
features in a 2d map that has nothing to
do with the topology of the image we
could choose any topology we want
in fact this is not actually a 2d
topology it's a it's a toridol topology
so the left side touches the right side
on the top touches the bottom
so it's topologically identical to
taurus
and what we do is we regroup
sets of 36 features within a group okay
and those uh groups of 36 features
overlap by
by three columns and three rows okay so
we have multiple groups of 36 features
six by six
shifted by three you could think of this
as kind of pulling over
feature but not putting over space
because there's no space here it's a
free connected network
but it has a bit of the flavor the same
flavor as pooling
except here you pull over 36 features
you don't pull over space
all right so
so then you you compute the sum of the
l2
norm of the the features that are within
each group
and that's the regularizer you use when
you train your your sparse autoencoder
so the system uh wants to do is minimize
the number of groups that are on at any
one time
and so as i said before it basically
it regroups all the features that are
similar and likely to fire
simultaneously into into groups
and because the groups overlap then it
creates those kind of slowly evolving
sets of features that sort of uh seem to
kind of swirl
around a point
so the features you get as a result of
this have some sort of invariance and
they have some invariance not to
shift but to things like rotation and
scale and things like that
whatever the system decides so here the
reason for choosing a 2d topology
is basically just for you know to make
it look
beautiful but uh you could you could
choose any kind of topology
you want what is on the x-axis and the
y-axis here in this diagram so those are
arbitrary axes
i have i don't even remember how many
features there are here this
this might be 256 features i think it's
16 by 16.
so there's 256 uh hidden units right so
imagine a network that has
a 12 by 12 input patch okay an input
image it's a patch from an image
and 256 uh hidden units
with a fully connected full connection
uh non-linearity and there is
uh another layer on top
um then that's the encoder and then you
have uh
this group sparsity and then the the
decoder is linear
okay and what you're seeing here are the
columns of the decoder
and they are organized in a 2d topology
okay but it's arbitrary
each of these squares is a column of the
decoder each of these square is a column
of decoder that
also corresponds to a component of z
okay a component of the
for the feature the future vector
and so they are organized in a 16 by 16
matrix but it's kind of arbitrary we
just you know
put them in a in a matrix and then we
train
and because uh the groups take
kind of six by six neighborhoods in this
topology
the system naturally kind of learns
features that are similar when they're
nearby within this topology
all right but again i could have chosen
any kind of topology
1d2d 3d or even some graph
neighborhood of some kind as long as the
pooling is
you know between neighbors on the graph
that's that will work
so what i've done here is going to
repeat this this little
pattern um to kind of show
uh because it's you know it's historical
uh
to show the you know how those those
those patterns kind of repeat and are
sort of periodical
and the reason for visualizing it this
way is that
this is the kind of stuff that
neuroscientists observe when they poke
electrodes in the
usual primary visual cortex of
mammals but most most animals that have
good vision
they see kind of those kind of swirling
patterns where neighboring
neurons detect similar features which
means similar oriented edges they are
sensitive to oriented edges and and
neighboring
neurons are similar are sensitive to
similar angles
or the same angles that similar scale or
or
things like that and so
perhaps this is how you know the brain
organizes
its uh its neurons it's by kind of
basically having some sort of criterion
on the
complex cells which are the equivalent
of the pulling units that we're seeing
here
um here is the another example here so
this one is
uh not at the patch level but it uses
local connections
but it's not convolutional in the sense
that it doesn't use uh shared weights
the reason for doing this is to have
some you know a semi-realistic
uh sort of correspondence to
a uh uh sort of biological learning
where of course you know neurons in the
brain cancer
can't share weights right they um they
end up being similar because
you know they train using some sort of
unsupervised learning but
there is no such thing as as well
sharing in the brain as far as we know
so it was asked if the uh if you're a
similar similar strategy of the
training of the autoencoder with the
classifier and the regular
regularizer can be applied for a
variation of the encoder and
whether this has been explored if it
works as well
for the first slide you show yeah so um
you're basically
adding noise in a variation auto encoder
and
forcing sparsity are basically two ways
to
achieve the same purpose which is reduce
the capacity of the
of the legend variable reduce the
capacity of the of the code
that is extracted by the autoencoder and
this is what prevents the system from
running a trivial identity function
which would not be useful
right and what we talked about the last
couple times
is the fact that if you reduce the
information capacity
of the latent variable of the code you
uh
as a consequence you also minimize the
volume of
space that can take low energy okay
because you limit the number of
configurations
of the code and so as a consequence you
can limit the volume of space that can
take low energy
so essentially this idea of
regularizing with l1 or sparsity or
something like this or adding noise to a
code
where limiting the norm of the code
achieves the same purpose which is
limiting the capacity of the of the code
for the purpose of limiting the volume
of space that can take low energy
and as a consequence if you train part
of the space to have low energy by
minimizing the reconstruction error
on your training samples automatically
the rest of the space will have higher
energy
because the capacity the volume the
kentucky energy is limited
um so this is uh just to recap
uh we talked about last time and and a
couple weeks ago
this is to this is sort of the
alternative
so those kind of architectural methods
are alternatives to the
contrastive methods where you explicitly
push up
on the energy of bad samples
which means you have to come up with a
good idea you know a good way of
generating bad samples
in that case okay so again remember
those two
types of methods contractive methods you
push down the energy of the training
samples you push up the energy of stuff
outside either by corrupting the
original samples
or by doing uh uh gradient noisy
gradient descent you know contrast
divergence things like this
or by generating contrasting points in
some way um
we've seen a bunch of different
contrasting methods and then the
alternative
is limiting the capacity of a code
uh or or kind of limiting the volume of
stuff that can take low energy in the
context of
autoencoder or predictor this means
limiting the capacity of the code
and there are many ways to do this one
way is through sparsity
one way is through adding noise while
limiting the norm that's the a east
and there are other ways that we'll
we'll talk about in a minute whenever
you were talking before about the group
sparsity
uh you are summing just a few samples
like a few
indexes within a small range what is
that pj
maybe i didn't ej is a group it's a pool
so
imagine this is a pool like in a
convolutional net but the pool instead
of
putting just over space it pulls over
features as well
okay for a fully connected network it
just pulls over
components of the just features okay so
ppj is like a set of indexes pj is a
subset
of uh indices of z of components of z
yeah okay thanks
right so here pj is a group of six
components of z that happen to be
neighbors in this topology okay
and that's that's one p and the next p
is
a similar square six by six square
shifted by three pixels
to the left to the top or uh or bottom
okay okay bottom okay thanks
so the overlapping between the groups is
what kind of uh
represents this topology if you want
okay
so in this this experiment you know is
is very similar to the one we just uh
talked about
except here um we have local connections
so we have an input it's a
two-dimensional input here we kind of
only represent a 1d version of it
and and we have units uh possibly
multiple units at one location
uh looking at a piece of the input kind
of a local patch on the input
and then those set of those sets of
units are
kind of you know replicated uh multiple
times but
there's no shared weights um so the the
units
these kind of units everywhere on the
input but they the weights are not
shared
okay they're just locally connected
so i guess i'm not quite understanding
the
overall concept of the of feature
pooling um i mean if i think about it in
terms of like
pooling that we used in in convolutional
networks
than it it straightforward but
i don't really understand how we how
feature pooling works okay
let me let me draw a picture maybe
that'll be clear okay so
you start with an input vector okay
multiply by
a matrix or pass it through uh some sort
of uh
encoder right which may have values
and whatever or multiple matrices inside
okay maybe multiple layers and you get a
future vector
okay so let's call that z
and now and now you do you do putting
essentially so
you divide this into groups in this case
are non-overlapping
and you compute the within
one of those groups you compute the
square root
of the sum of the squares of those zi's
where i belong to the group the pool
okay it's called p because it's a pool
okay and you do this for all the groups
right
so what you get here this output here
looks very much like the output of a
putting layer
in the conversion from that this is not
a conventional net okay it's a fully
connected
network here but the result is the same
and that's your that's your regularizer
now in the example i just showed
you take the z and this is what you send
to
a decoder matrix for me to reconstruct
the input okay so this is y this is y
bar
that's a prediction for the
reconstruction and this
this put this pooled layer here is is
only used
to compute the regularizer it's not
actually used as
uh for reconstruction you reconstruct
from the sparse code directly
but it is it looks very much like a
pulling layer now if this were
uh if this were a a convolutional net
then that that dimension or a feature
here
would be
features but you would have multiple
feature maps
okay so i'm representing the feature
dimension vertically
then the encoder would do multiple
convolutions and would also generate
multiple feature maps perhaps a larger
number
and then the kind of pulling we would do
here
is a pudding where so each
after pulling we would take
a window over space as well as
over features
and compute the square root of sum of
the square there and that gives us
one output in our pulling output
and then we have multiple groups of
features like this that go into
different
pulling so it doesn't matter whether
this is convolutional or not
in convolutions you would pull over
space as well as
feature type but um
if you don't have convolution you just
pull over features and that you know
builds
invariants to whatever it is that uh the
citizens think
uh thinks make sense
is that clear does that answer your
question
yeah i think it's it's more clear thank
you
um i have a question for when you do
when you split the z
into groups and do the cooling would
those groups overlap
right so uh in the example i showed here
they do not overlap but you can make
them overlap
okay so so let's say we have
a feature vector z
i can take a pool here and a pool here
and a pool here and here those groups
overlap and if i do this
and i do group sparsity where these
other groups
what's going to happen is that i'm going
to have sort of a continuously varying
set of features here that sort of vary
from one end to the other
because the system is going to want to
group within a pool
features that are similar and so because
of the overlap
it's going to sort of continuously vary
them so that they change slowly
over the over the vector now uh
in the pictures that i showed in the
slides uh instead of organizing the
the z features here in a 1d topology i
organized them in a 2d topology
and i made the groups 2-dimensional
right so i take a
six by six block uh that's one group
and then the next group will be another
six by six block with
some overlap and then the next group
will be
yet another six by six block okay and
maybe i have an
another one because i have a torito
topology that
takes these guys and these guys okay and
then there is you know the
similar thing kind of um
you know sliding up et cetera so the
groups basically
are those six by six windows that are
shifted by three and and overlapping
and so that's how you get those sort of
continuously varying uh
features uh along the along the
dimension
the two dimensions i could have equally
well
uh chosen to organize this into in a 3d
topology
or into some sort of tree right so i i
take all the components of z
and i organize them in some sort of
graph
perhaps a tree
so this is called structured structural
sparsity not gross parsley anymore well
depends how you do it i guess
and then the groups would be things like
uh
this would this would be a group and
then perhaps this would be a group as
well
uh and i can organize a group in sort of
uh
russian dolls like this uh and
uh what's gonna happen there is that the
the groups that um the units that are in
many groups will tend to be very sparse
whereas the groups the
units that are in a few groups will tend
to be less sparse
and so if you're if you do something
like this with a tree what happens here
is that
the the feature in the center tends to
be not sparse at all it's going to be
something that really sort of detects
just you know
very sort of generic features and then
at the first level in the tree
they're going to be a little sparse so
they're going to be sort of very sort of
smooth edge extractors or something like
that
and then the more you go inside of the
tree the more
each feature enters in a large number of
pools
and therefore they get more uh pressure
to be sparse and so they end up being
much sparser which means they end up
being more selective
for particular features and what happens
there is that
when you show an image it tends to favor
activating features that are along uh
one particular branch
in that tree because that's the best way
to sort of minimize the number of pools
that are on at any one time so that's
called structural sparsity
and there's a number of papers uh on
this by uh
uh julia merrell so this this goes back
about
about ten years ago and uh rodol
i mean they co-authored this senior
author was francis back
i really i put the reference in one of
the slides
and there's a paper by my group also by
arthur schlamm
which i'll i'll go to in a minute
can you explain why grouping
regularization actually helps
in grouping similar features well so
that's a good question
uh where first of all does it help
and uh and the answer is not clear
so those experiments were done uh quite
a while ago
before the computation was really
available and the data was available
uh for for this to really kind of work
at a big scale
this was mostly uh viewed as uh the
people interested in this were
interested in two things they were
either interested in
unsupervised running for things like
image restoration and stuff like that
this was what jeremiah was doing
um all they were interested in uh
uh unsupervised star supervised
pre-training because at the time the
data sets were very small
for for training uh uh convolutional
nets they were too small so they had to
be some sort of pre-training procedure
which is what i was interested in and so
it's the same motivation that we
now have again for self-supervised
garnie
but a lot of those methods haven't been
brought back to the fore they tended to
work very well when the data set was
small
um so they tended to kind of improve
performance of
uh let's say a compositional net if you
pre-trained this uh using a method
so using a method very similar to the
one i i uh
i showed earlier so something a bit like
this but convolutional
so make the the encoder and the decoder
convolutional and uh and and train with
good sparsity on complex cells and then
after you're you're done pre-training
this uh the system you get rid of the
decoder you only use the encoder as a
feature extractor
for uh say the first layer of a
conventional net
and you stick a second layer on top of
it okay so let me go through this
a little bit so you start you start with
a
with an image you
you have an encoder which is basically
a convolution uh
value
not much more than that okay just
combination value uh
there needs to be some sort of scaling
layer afterwards for for this particular
case
and you you train with group
groups positive so you have a linear
decoder
and you kind of reconstruct the input
and you have
a
you have a criterion here which is this
group l1
okay so it's sum of a group sorry
i call the good p right sum of a group a
square root of sum for
i in the group of
z i squared okay so that's good sparsity
so you train this little uh sparse uh
auto encoder with good sparsity
and then what you do is you you you take
the
the the the sparsity layer that you just
used as a
as a as a regularizer
and so you basically eliminate um
you cut this part out of the network you
take
the goosebumps d which is really a
pulling layer an
l2 pulling layer and you stick it here
okay so this is basically l2 pulling
but it has the same architecture as the
one you use for the
um you know for the groups the goose
part city
and then you use that as a feature
extractor
okay which is like it's like the first
pair of layers of a combinational net
composition value pulling okay with this
l2 pulling not max pulling and then you
can repeat the process you can train
another instance of this network
have a couple layers here
i'm going to and have a
decoder have this l2
uh pulling and sparsity criterion
train this to reconstruct its input
and then stick the pulling on top
eliminate this
and now we have you have a pre-trained
two-layer accomplishment
okay this is a procedure that some
people call
stacked audio encoder okay so you train
an auto encoder to extract features
and then you and then you generate
features with the encoder of that
part of that of the auto encoder and you
stick another layer on top train that
as another encoder and then keep going
and the only characteristic here is that
this autoencoder is trained
with uh you know to produce environment
features through
group sparsity essentially we use all
possible sub-trees as groups in the
previous example
uh no that's kind of up to you really
what structure you use here you can use
multiple trees you can use
if you want multiple features to kind of
be uh to represent
an input even at the low frequency so
that's really up to you
um you know it could be like what you
can afford
uh what you can do also is train the
system with you know a bigger tree than
necessary and then sort of prune the
tree
whenever there are branches that are not
used or used very rarely
okay so this is a the experiment i
showed here is uh
similar but there's only local
connections and no
no weight sharing
and what you see here is this again this
organization of the features
in terms of what neuroscientists call
pinwheel patterns
so pinwheel patterns are those patterns
where the uh
orientation selectivity varies
continuously as you
go around one of those red dots
so you take one of those red dots and if
you kind of do a little circle around
the the red dots
what you notice is that the orientation
of the feature
of the edge extractor kind of varies
continuously as you move around
and those are called pinwheel patterns
and they are observed in the
in the brain
in fact those pictures here on the right
come from neuroscience papers
that describe this where the the the
color here encodes the orientation set
activity
and the little stars indicate those
[Music]
kind of the singularities here the the
center of the pinwheels
is the group sparsity term trained uh to
have a small value
well it's a regularizer right let me
go back to the
um it's a it's it's a cost function
during training or during inference
depending on
whether you use the
the sort of predictive version of it
where you have latent variable or not
but
um but it's basically just a
it's basically just a term in the energy
right
so the term itself is not trained it's
fixed
right it's just the l2 norm over groups
and the groups are predetermined
uh but because it's a criterion it sort
of determines
what the what the encoder and the
decoders will do what type of features
will be extracted
here is um another example of
a sort of you know exotic way of doing
sparse coding through lateral inhibition
and there's a bunch of different ways to
do this that people are proposed
this one came came from uh uh carol
gregor and utter schlem
in my lab about 10 years ago and so here
there is
again a linear decoder with a square
reconstruction error this is wz minus
x where x is the input here in this case
and then there is a criterion in the
energy
which is uh the vector formed by the
absolute values of z
transpose times some matrix times the
vector itself so it's an
um a kind of a quadratic form
uh that involves z and this matrix s and
the matrix s is
either determined by hand or
learned so as to kind of maximize this
term
okay and
if the terms in uh in s
are positive and large if one particular
term
s i j is large what that means is that
the system does not want zi and zj to be
on at the same time
okay it wants the if zi is on
and s i j is large then it wants zj to
be off
and vice versa okay and so it's sort of
a mutual inhibition
people use people call this lateral
inhibition uh in uh
in neuroscience uh it's basically you
know all your feature vectors basically
inhibit other feature vectors through
this matrix s
you can decide that the matrix s a
priori is structured
so you can decide that only some terms
are nonzero you can decide that
some terms those terms are fixed or can
be trained
and the way you train them is by
actually maximizing uh so it's kind of
adversarial training a little bit you
you try to find the the value of s that
sort of
you know uh is as large as possible if
you want within limits
above a certain value of sij one of the
z
one of zi or zj is going to go to zero
and that term is gonna disappear
so the system is gonna you know
maximize the sijs until uh
it's large enough to kind of do the
mutual inhibition between z and zj
and it's not going to go any further
because it doesn't need to
and again if you organize s
in terms of a tree so so here
the the lines represent the
the zero terms uh in the s matrix
and whenever you don't have a line
between two features there's a
there's a non-zero term in the s matrix
right so every feature inhibits all
other features except the ones that are
up the tree or down the tree uh from it
uh and this is very much like lagroup's
sparsity a little bit it's kind of the
uh kind of the converse if you want of
ghost parsity instead of
saying features within a branch of the
tree
need to be activated together by
minimizing
you know l2 minimizing the number of
such groups that are on
here you explicitly have a sort of
inhibition
term that for every
every feature inhibits all other
features in
all the other branches of the tree
and what you see again is that you see
this
systems are organizing the features in a
more or less so continuous fashion
um and in such a way that
features along a branch of the tree
correspond to basically the same feature
but
with uh sort of different levels of
selectivity
and then features along the periphery
sort of vary more or less continuously
because
there is you know in addition not just
at the bottom level but also at the
middle level
okay so to uh to go back to this the way
you train the system
is uh at each iteration you give an x
you find the z that minimizes this
energy function
so you find a z that reconstructs but
also minimizes the second term
which means that if you have an sij term
that is nonzero
it wants either zi or zj to be zero or
at least very small
you do one step a great in descent now
to
uh turn to kind of update uh w so as to
minimize the construction error
and you do also if you want you can do
one step of gradient ascent to make the
terms in s larger
by kind of computing the gradient of
this energy with respect to s but then
going up the energy not down
uh again if you use a not a tree but
sort of some sort of 2d topology you
also get those kind of those kind of
patterns
and more complex ones if there are kind
of multiple scales for the features
okay so so much for sparse coding and
structure space coding
and the reason i'm i'm telling you about
this is because
uh although those don't have a huge
amount of practical applications the
sparsely instructions passcoding
they in my opinion uh
will be the basis for kind of
self-supervised running methods
of the next few years as i told you i
think south surprise running right now
is
the hottest topic in nlp uh and it's
becoming kind of
a bit of a hot topic in computer vision
as well
and it's mostly now dominated by
contrasting methods but i think uh
the architectural methods are going to
take over because contrasting methods
don't scale very well
so this is sort of you know giving you
weapons for the future
if you want understanding what this is
all about
um okay now for something completely
different this is something that alfredo
will like because he works on this
project
and it's one of the users
probably one of the most important users
of star supervisor learning is the
idea of learning world models
for control systems or for other purpose
so um
when we when humans or animals learn a
task
we quite obviously have a kind of good
internal model
of how the world works of intuitive
physics of
the fact that when an object is not
supported it falls
we've learned gravity when we were
babies probably around the age of
nine months or so eight or nine months
that's when it pops up in babies
um and we learned this mostly about
observation so how is it that we can
learn
how the world works and all the concepts
about the world
by observation and there are there are
two
reasons for this right so one i already
explained is the idea of supervised
learning if you can
train yourself to predict maybe you will
spontaneously kind of learn
abstract concepts about the world that
might be useful
in preparation for running a particular
task or a set of tasks
but there's another reason which is that
you actually want to build models of the
world if you want to be able to act on
the world
right so i'm holding this pen
and i know that if i move my hand up
the the pen will move with it because
you know
it's between my fingers i know that if i
open my fingers
the pen will fall i know by gravity i
know by grasping
uh i've learned all that stuff and i've
learned mostly about observation i've
learned also by experimentation
but a lot of what i learned i learned
just by observation so the big question
is can we learn can we
use what we've learned about
self-supervised learning to
train a system to learn world models
um and what is a well model okay so if
you if you want to sort of
give the an idea of the architecture of
an autonomous
intelligence system
it would be a system that is composed of
essentially four
major blocks here that are represented
on the left so
it's an intelligent agent or maybe not
so intelligent we'll see
it has a perception module and the
perception module basically observes the
world and then
computes a representation of the state
of the world
okay called st at time t
s of t is the the
idea that the system has of the state of
the world this is necessarily an
incomplete
representation of the world because we
can't observe the entire universe at
once
we only observe what's immediately
around us and even that we can't
see through occlusions and there is a
lot of
you know internal states about the world
that we can't observe well enough
even if you can observe your accuracy or
observation may not be
good enough so if i put this pen in my
in my hand and it appears to be vertical
and let it go
it's going to fall but you can't really
predict in what direction i've used that
example before
to describe the problem of
alliatoric uh uncertainty which is the
world is non-deterministic and you can't
predict exactly what's going to happen
because you don't have a perfect reading
of the state of the world
and maybe the world is intrinsically
stochastic
we don't know that actually okay so a
forward model
is a model that given the current state
of the world s of t
or your idea of your current state of
the world and
an action that you're taking or that
someone else is taking
something that you can choose or at
least observe
and perhaps an auxiliary latent variable
z of t which represents
what you don't know about the world okay
so the part of the world the state of
the world that
you don't know or the thing that's
unpredictable about what's going to go
and
go on in the world the forward model
predicts the next state of the world
st plus one okay you discretized uh
time in in some way so if you have
a model of the world of that type
you can simulate in your head what's
going to happen as a consequence of your
actions
okay so you have this uh this model in
your head
uh you know the current state of the
world was
some idea of the current state of the
world you run your internal model of the
world forward
with a sequence of a of t which is a
sequence of action that you imagine
taking
and your model of the world as you
imagine it will predict
what's going to happen in the world okay
if you could do this then you could plan
a sequence of actions that will arrive
at a particular goal
okay so for example what sequence of
action should i
uh should i do to grab this pen
um you know i should you know follow a
particular trajectory
you know actuate my muscles in a
particular way so i grab this pen
and the criterion the the the cost
function i can measure is
is whether i've grabbed the pen okay
whether the pen is in my grasp
i could measure this with some some
function perhaps
and the question is can i plan a
sequence of action that given my model
of the world
which in this case is the model of my
hand and the model of where the pen
is will allow me to grab it okay
it's a little more complicated if i
throw the pen and i have to catch it in
the air
okay because i have to predict the
trajectory of the pen so i have to have
uh an intuitive model of physics
to be able to uh grab that pen which of
course i've learned through experience
as well
people are surprised you like so much
reinforcement learning this is not
reinforcement
it has absolutely nothing to do with
reinforcement learning maybe
be very clear this has nothing to do
with reinforcement learning
uh this may have to do in the future
okay but right now it doesn't
um model-based reinforcement learning no
it doesn't has nothing to do with
refreshment running
let me okay let me let me go through
this a little bit can you explain the
difference then
someone asking um in a minute okay
so now uh
so on the left here you have this little
agent it has this model of the world
that you can run forward
okay uh it can it has an actor or you
can think of it as a policy that
produces a sequence of actions which is
going to feed to the model
and then a critic which is going to
predict what the
cost of the
final state or the trajectory is going
to be according to the criterion so
the critic here computes the
basically the cost of not fulfilling the
goal that i set myself
okay so if i if my task is to reach for
the span and i kind of miss the pen by a
few centimeters
my cost is a few centimeters if i grab
it the cost is zero
if i miss it by a lot the cost is higher
okay that would be an example of a cost
now okay so there there is
a number of different things you can do
with uh this sort of basic
uh model of uh intelligent agent so the
first one is
uh you start from an initial state that
you observe in the world
you run your forward model you give a
a proposal for a sequence of actions you
measure the cost
and what you can do here ignoring the
the p here which represents a policy
um let's let's imagine it doesn't exist
by gradient descent or by some sort of
optimization algorithm you could
you could try to find the sequence of
actions that will minimize the overall
cost
over the trajectory i start from the
state
i run my forward model
and it it takes an action
okay let me just call this a1 this is s1
or s1
and this is going to give me s2
and i'm going to measure the cost of s2
through some cost function
see
okay the next time step running my
forward model again
make an action action proposal a2 this
is all simulated this is all in my head
right
because this model this forward model is
in my head see my frontal cortex
so i'm not actually doing this in the
world
etc right so i can unroll this for a few
time steps those time steps can be
milliseconds if i control muscles they
can be
seconds if i control high level actions
they can be hours okay so if i want to
plan how to
i don't know go to san francisco you
know i need to
to the airports and then catch a plane
and then
when i arrive there catch a taxi or
something
etc okay so this is independent at the
the level of which
level description of the of the thing
okay so what i can do with this is i can
do a very classical
method called model predictive control
so it's a classical method of
optimal control which is a whole
discipline
that has been around since the the 50s
if not if not earlier
and some of the methods are method
predictive controls goes go back to the
the 1960s there's something called the
kelly bison algorithm
i think it's kelly with an e i'm not
sure
um so this is the
method very similar to the one i'm
describing at the moment
and this was used primarily by
nasa let's say to compute trajectories
for rockets okay so when they started
having computers in the 60s
uh at nasa they they started computing
trajectories with computers and they
were basically using things like this
before that they had to do it by hand
okay
and if you haven't seen the movie uh
hidden figures i
um it describes how people were
competing this by hand this was
mostly due mostly done by black women
black mathematicians
uh women mathematicians who also ended
up kind of programming those computers
watch that movie is it's really great um
okay so here is a
basic idea here um this looks very much
like a recurrent net
okay because your ford model is
basically the same network replicated
over
over time and this is like an unworld
recurrent network
and so well what you do here is you back
propagate
the value of the cost through this
entire network all the way to the
actions and you don't use this for
training you use this for inference you
think of the actions
as latent variables and you basically by
gradient descent or some other
optimization method
you find a sequence of actions that will
minimize the sum of the cost over the
trajectory
okay
so basically you have
an overall cost um
i'm going to call it big c and that's
going to be the sum or the time step
time steps of the little c of
st okay
uh and what you're going to do is
big a which is the sequence of a is
going to be replaced by
its own value minus some
step size times the gradient of big c
with respect to
a okay so as long as you can compute the
gradient of the sum of those costs over
the trajectory with respect to all of
the components of a
which means the a the trajectories of a
you can do this optimization you don't
have to do it necessarily for gradient
descent
in some cases there are more efficient
ways to do this optimization
um using dynamic programming for example
if a is discrete
that might be more efficient but but if
a is continuous and high dimensional you
basically have no choice but to use
gradient based methods
okay so this is inference it's not
there's no learning yet what is a
big a is the sequence a1
a2 a3 etc
okay so you have a differentiable
objective function
and you can minimize it with respect to
the variables you're interested in so
what do you get out of this
there are no weights in a a is a vector
right so
a is a vector yeah yeah so that was
actually because we never use
uh we never minimize vectors so far we
always been minimizing
we are always being optimizing weights
so people are oh we have
for latent variables like the z
variables the latent variables of the
energy-based models the latent variables
we do minimize the energy
with respect to z so this is the same
problem here we're solving
i think yeah i think not everyone
understood that the latent variables are
actually inputs
so that was i think like also
misunderstanding with the
question we had on piazza about training
these these
uh latent variable models yeah you don't
want to use the word
training for literal variables or for
things like this
because uh you want to use inference
okay you want to use the word
to infer or to not to train i want to
use
the word inference not training what's
the difference between inference and
training
training with training you
learn a a parameter
uh that is the same for a large number
of samples
okay for inference you find the value of
some variable a latent variable
a in this case z in the case of a latent
variable energy-based model
uh that is specific to one sample
okay you change the sample the written
variable changes
so you don't learn it because you don't
remember it from one once when
one time to the next you know there's no
memory
for it right um
so that's the difference you know
conceptually you're doing the same kind
of operation where you do learning and
inference
and so at some level of abstraction
they're the same
but uh inference you do it per sample
learning you do it uh over a bunch of
samples
and you the parameter is shared across
the samples
when we have an energy based model and
we'd like to do inference we still have
a minimization to do at
every time we perform this uh
we use it right so that was a big
difference between after you
after you've trained the model when you
use it you you still have to do
minimization with respect to the latent
variables
okay so that's the big difference same
here
here uh there may or may not be any
training your forward model may be built
by hand or maybe trained but
by the time we're here it's trained
we're not training anything here
we're just doing inference we're
figuring out what is the optimal value
of the sequence of a is that we'll
minimize our
uh for cost overall cost and this is an
inference problem
just like energy-based models for
example the fm
the four model can be just a one line of
equation of physics right it can be just
a deterministic equation
so imagine the forward model is the few
equations that describe the
the uh the the physics of a rocket
and a is basically the action on the
the steering you know how you orient the
nozzles and then the the thrust
so that would be the the collection of a
would be the collection of those
variables and then there is you know
very simple physics newtonian physics
basically
uh you can write the equations it will
give you the state of the
racket at the next uh time step uh as a
function of state of arc at the previous
time step and the actions you're taking
that's how you do simulations that's how
every simulator works
and then your cost function if you want
to shoot a rocket would be
maybe a combination of two things one uh
would be the
the uh energy spent during that time
step
okay the amount of fuel you spent
something like that
and the second term might be the
distance to a target you want to reach
maybe you want to
rendezvous with a space station and uh
the the second term in the cost would be
the distance to the space station
okay square distance to the space
station uh
if you measure the um the sum over the
entire trajectory of the distance to the
space station
the system will try to minimize the time
it will take to get to the space station
because they will want to minimize
the sum of the square of the distances
to the space station over the trajectory
but at the same time it wants to
minimize fuel so you have to balance
those two terms right so that's a
classical way
of doing optimal control and that's
called model predictive control
is model is kalman filtering one type of
model predictive control
no camera filtering is a particular uh
forward model if you want it's a way of
estimating the state of the world
okay but um
it's you know basically given your
observation of the state of the world
through a perception system there's
going to be some uncertainty about the
state of the world
and the command filter basically assumes
a gaussian distribution on this
uncertainty
and now when you run through your
forward model
you're going to have a resulting
uncertainty about the state of the world
at the next time step
because it wasn't certain to start with
okay so given the uncertainty when you
started from where you started from
what's the uncertainty after one step of
physics if you want
and if you assume linearity of all those
steps
and gaussianity of the uncertainty
that's what uh that's what the
common filter is um
most of the uncertainty comes from okay
so now now your forward model produces
a prediction and then the next time step
you might get another reading of the
state of the world
because your sensors are still working
so now you have two gaussians one is
your new perception of the world tells
you here is where i think
the state of the world is and your ford
model also predicted here is why i think
it what where i think it is
and you have to combine those two that's
where the comp the complexity of common
filtering comes in
which is uh i've got two gaussian
predictions
so the resulting probability
distribution is also a gaussian if you
compute the covariance matrix and
et cetera and that's where the the
formulas for
um common filters come from
okay so game filter is a way to deal
with the uncertainty
in the reading your perception of the
world
and in the uh uh
when you propagate this uncertainty in
your forward model
uh i think there was still a main
difference i think you wanted to address
the point that
the this is different from already okay
so what is rl in that context
okay so okay i need i need i need one
more step before i talk about rl
okay and here is that step
okay so what we had uh just a minute ago
was a forward model that's
enrolled in time
and the system has
takes a sequence of actions a1
a2 a3
s1 s2 and then we have the cost function
here
coming up
okay and this this could go on right
now what we'd like to be able to do
is not have to do this optimization with
respect to a1 a2 a3 a4
uh every time every time we need to do a
planning we don't want to have to
do to go through this complex process of
back propagating
a gradient through this entire system to
do model predictive
uh control
and so a simple simple way to get rid of
that step
is the same trick that we use in auto
encoders versus passcoding so remember
it's passcoding
we wanted to reconstruct but then we had
to do inference with respect to the
latent variable by optimization
and that turned out to be to be
expensive so we talked about last week
was the idea of using an encoder
that we trained to predict the optimal
value directly
okay and we're going to do the same here
that resulted in the idea as part of the
encoder we're going to do the same here
i'm going to train a network to take the
state
and directly predict what the optimal
value of the action is
and this network of course we're going
to apply every time step
and this is going to be called a policy
network
okay so the policy network takes the
state
and produces a guess about the best
action
to take at at this time so as to
minimize the overall cost
okay and this is going to be a trainable
neural net
or whatever model parametrized model
that we want the way we're going to
train this model is basically just back
back propagation
okay so we're going to uh using our
perception module this is this is the
this is the world here and
we're looking at the world with a camera
and there's a perception module that
gives us a guess as to what the state of
the world is
okay this is perception
and this is a forward model applied
multiple time steps
and this is all cost
okay so what we can do
is run the system
and to run the system we first
run through the perception we compute
an action we run this action through the
forward model this forward model gives
us
here is the next state we're going to be
in compute the cost
and then keep going okay keep doing this
just forward pop through this entire
system which is really kind of an
unrolled
recurrent net if you want and once
you're done
you back propagate gradient gradients
from the all the terms in the cost
function
all the way through the network all the
way through the parameters
of that policy network
okay so basically you compute uh
d of big c so big c remember is the sum
of all the c's
a long time with respect to d w
okay and that's just going to be the sum
of a time
of the big c over
dw
sorry yeah big c over d
a t d a t
or d w okay i've just applied chain rule
right but
i don't need to right if i just you know
define this function in python and just
do backward
it'll just do the right thing um so
i can compute the gradient of the
overall cost with respect to the
parameters of that policy network and so
if i train this over sufficiently many
uh samples if my forward model is
correct if my cost function does what i
want
then my policy network is going to learn
a good policy that
just looking at the state will minimize
the expected cost over trajectory
okay the average cost over a trajectory
there's no reinforcement running here
this is all background
okay now we can talk about the
difference with refreshment running
the main difference with reinforcement
running here
is uh is is twofold the first one is in
reinforcement learning
in most reinforcement training scenarios
at least
the the c
function is a black box well it's a
black box not a red box
okay that's the first difference the
second difference is that this is not a
forward model of the world this is the
real world
and your measure of the state of the
world is imperfect so
inside of this policy network you might
have a perception network here
that estimates the state of the world so
you have no control over
the real world and your cost function
is not known you can you can just get
the output of the cost function by just
trying something
right you take an action you see the
effect on the world
and that gives you uh what reinforcement
running people call a reward but it's
just a negative cost
okay is the value of negative value of
your cost
but the cost is not differentiable you
don't know the function of the cost you
have to go through the world
to figure out the value of the cost okay
um and that's the that's that's the main
issue with reinforcement running which
is that the cost function is not
differentiable
uh it's it's unknown the only way to
estimate it is by
trying something and then observing the
value which is what the reward is
really it's a negative the negative of
the reward is basically your your cost
okay so in that situation since you
cannot evaluate gradients
to minimize your cost you have to try
multiple things you have to
try an action see the result and then
try another action see if the result is
better
and then try another action see if the
result is better and
if your cost function is very flat you
have to try many many things before you
get a non-zero reward
or you know a non-high cost
and so that's that's where the the
complexity goes there is the additional
problem of
exploration so um
you know you because you don't know the
the form of the of the cost and because
it's non-differentiable
uh you might need to kind of try many
actions in kind of a smart way to figure
out in which part of the space to go to
be able to sort of figure out
how can i improve my uh my performance
okay so that's the the main issue uh of
uh uh exploration and then there is the
issue of
uh exploration versus exploitation so
the fact that
um when you're on a situation you don't
want to take completely random
actions because they're likely to not
result in anything interesting so you
want to take actions that are kind of
close to
what you think might work uh and sort of
you know
occasionally kind of try something else
while you're learning
and learn your policy as you go what i'm
describing
what i was describing just before is a
situation where
you can do all of this in your head
because you have a model of the world
and you can optimize your sequence of
action very efficiently
because you have a differentiable cost
function your cost function is computed
by your
your own brain if you want inside of
your agent
you can tell if you grab the if you go
out the pen you can tell the distance
between your
hand and the pen so you can compute your
own cost function and it is kind of
in your internal world model is
differentiable in the real world it's
not
in the real world you don't know the
derivative of the distance of your hand
to the pen unless you have some model of
that in your head
but by default you don't but because
everything is in your head everything is
differentiable everything is
implemented by neural net and everything
you can back properly gradient to
everything
so that's the big advantage of this kind
of approach versus reinforcement
planning
okay make everything differentiable so
there's two problems with the world
so there's one big advantage in this
kind of this kind of scenario
uh which is you can run this faster than
real time because your forward model
inside of your agent can run as fast as
you want you don't need to
run through the world okay that's one
advantage second advantage is
the actions you're taking will not kill
you
because you can predict uh using your
forward model
you know maybe you'll predict that the
action will kill you but you're not
going to take it in the real world so
it won't kill you if you have an
accurate forward model
third advantage because everything takes
place in your head
everything is internet everything is
differentiable you can use all kinds of
efficient
uh learning or
inference algorithms to figure out a
good course of actions
okay so that's the difference with with
reinforcement training in refreshment
running
you're telling yourself i have to go
through the real world
uh i don't have a model of the real
world
i don't know how to compute the cost
function in a differentiable way
that said a lot of reinforcement
learning methods
actually work by training a model of the
cost function
okay so actor critic methods basically
the role of the critic uh is to learn
to evaluate to kind of predict the value
of the
overall objective function the expected
value of the objective function
and because it's a it's a neural net
that you're going to train you can back
backpropagate gradient to it so you're
basically
learning an approximation of the cost
function of the real world
of the real world using using a neural
net that's that's the role of a critic
okay why is it so good to have models
when you're learning a
skill like learning to drive for example
it's basically what allows you to learn
quickly and to learn without killing
yourself
so if you don't have a good model of the
world you don't know about gravity you
don't know about the dynamics of objects
uh you don't know anything and you put
an agent
at the at the wheel of a car the agent
has no idea what the physics of a car
is okay and you put the car next to a
cliff
the car is driving at you know 30 miles
an hour next to
next to a cliff the agent
doesn't have a model of the world has no
idea that by turning the wheel to the
right
the car will run off the cliff and will
fall into the into the ravine
it has to actually try it to figure it
out it has to fall into the ravine to
figure out that this is a bad idea
okay and maybe just from one sample it's
not going to be able to learn it so it's
going to have to run into the ravine
like thousands of times before it
figures out
the model of the world that first
turning the wheel to the right makes the
car go to the right
and second that when the car goes above
a raven it falls into a ravine and
destroys itself
okay if you have a model of the world
that understands about gravity and
things like this
then you know that turning the wheel to
the right is going to make the caveat to
the ravine
and you don't do it because you know
it's going to kill you okay so it allows
humans and animals
to learn quickly much much quicker than
any uh
model-free reinforcement running methods
that has ever been devised
is is the fact that we have very very
good word models
in our head okay
now what does that tell us
um okay so here is the problem with
with the world the world is not
deterministic or
if it is deterministic it's so complex
that
it equally well could be
non-deterministic it doesn't make any
difference for it
for us there's two problems with
predicting the next state of the world
the first problem is
that the world is not entirely
predictable and it could be not entirely
predictable for two reasons those are
called
electoric uncertainty and epistemic
uncertainty auditory uncertainty
is due to the fact that the world is
intrinsically unpredictable
or the fact that we don't have full
information about the state of the world
so we cannot predict exactly what's
going to happen next
so you're looking at me right now you're
a pretty good model of the immediate
environment of
of me okay but you cannot exactly
predict in which way i'm going to move
my head next
because you don't have an accurate model
of what's inside my skull
okay your perceptual system does not
give you a full model of
how my brain functions uh unfortunately
so so you cannot exactly predict what
i'm you know what i'm going to do next
what i'm going to say i'm going to move
my head
et cetera so that's
elatoric uncertainty there is also
epistemic uncertainty epistemic
uncertainty is
the fact that you can't completely
predict the next
uh state of the world because the amount
of training data you've had
is not was not enough your model hasn't
been trained enough to really kind of
figure it out
okay that's kind of a different uh type
of
uncertainty so the big question now is
though how do we train models of the
world under a certainty i give you
an st can you predict st plus one
and it's the same problem we encountered
before we start supervising i give you
an x can you predict why
but the problem is that there are now
multiple y's that are compatible with x
the multiple st plus ones are compatible
with s even for a given
action
so what does that mean
that means that our model here or
forward model
may take the state to the world and an
action
but it will also have to take
a little variable which we don't know
the value of to predict the next state
okay and this looks very much like what
we talked about earlier
where we had i'm going to draw this in a
different topology but it's the same
idea
so we had x and it was going through
a predictor
computing h and then that was going
through
a decoder that will take into account a
latent variable
to predict
y-bar and then we observe y
okay this is a prediction for s and
maybe
at some time we might be able to
actually take the action and observe the
next state of the world while we are
training our model
we'll actually be observing the next
state of the world
t plus one
okay so to train a forward model here we
we take
the state st we take an action if we
have an action
uh we have a latent variable and our
prediction goes into a cost function
that diagram is exactly identical to the
one on the right
right it's the same it's exactly the
same diagram
except i split the
fm into two modules okay i get i've
given it a particular
architecture in fact i could make this
uh more explicit
i think you have the super thick marker
selected i do
yes you don't like that huh
so this would be my forward model
okay so that's what inside this box
uh inside of the ford model box here is
this
and you know i renamed uh
st is now called x and s c plus one is
not called y bar
but i mean it's not for y but it's the
same thing otherwise right so it's the
same scenario that we talked about
before
in late and variable energy-based models
essentially
but now we're going to use this to train
uh a forward model to predict
what's going to happen in the world
so
um we may have to play the same tricks
that that we played
uh that we talked about last week
which is that um
last week what we explained was that
we can take
okay the way i drew this last week was
slightly different
um what explained last week is that we
can
if we have while we are training our
forward model we have a pair x and y
and the way we find the value of z is by
minimizing the energy with respect to z
right
so we basically find z
star which is the argument
of c of y and
y-bar y-bar being the output of our of
our predictor
of our system
okay and then we do one step of gradient
descent so we
change the parameters of our entire
system
according to the gradient of uh
that cost but for this to work we had to
regularize the
limit its information content
and we have to do the same here
why is that well here we're
we're trying to solve a prediction
problem but
imagine and we talked about this a
couple weeks ago
i give you an x and a y and you find the
z that minimizes the overall energy and
the z is not regularized
if z is the same dimension as y the
there's probably going to be
a z for any y that makes the cost
function zero
right if there's enough capacity in z
there's always going to be
a value of z that makes the cost
function zero
and that's bad because that means my
energy function is going to be
completely flat
it's going to be zero everywhere and i
need it to be small on the training
samples
and high outside of the region of high
data density
and what we saw in the last couple weeks
is that by regularizing z
limiting its capacity either by
making its farce for example or making
it discrete or by
making it noisy then we can limit this
capacity
why do we need zt if you already have 80
well so 80 is the action you take right
um okay
i'm going to tell you i'm going to i'm
going to let this pen go
okay but you don't know which direction
it's going to
it's going to go right so let's say it
goes this way
but i have to predict in advance which
way it's going to go it's like
okay here's a better situation you are
uh
uh you're a goalie playing soccer
okay and it's a penalty kick so you're
in front of the
you know the kicker in front of you and
the guy is going to kick the ball
and you're going to have to jump one way
or the other and you have to make a
choice am i jumping left or right
and you have to make that decision based
on what you observe from the person but
you don't know exactly
what the ball is going to do a is which
direction you do you jump in
i mean it's basically how you jump z
is what you don't know about the player
in front of you doing
okay you don't know the state of the
world you don't know the state of the
brain of this guy
and so you don't know if he's going to
shoot left or right or up or down
okay that's the difference right
z is what you cannot know about the
world
that is necessary to make the prediction
the next state a is the action you take
which in this case has very little
influence on the immediate state of the
world
yeah it seems it seems to be clear now
right
so you need to regularize z and then one
of the tricks we uh
we described um
so so the one of the things we described
to regularize he was was passivity
another one was adding noise
um
but the other trick we described is this
idea of having an encoder right so
you have x or st
run through the predictor the predictor
goes into
the decoder which makes a prediction
about
y let's call it y bar
and you compare oops sorry
you compare y bar to y
and here you have z and what we talked
about
is the idea of using an encoder here
to predict the optimal value of z
and then basically having a cost
function that
is determining the energy that measures
the discrepancy between the
value of z you actually use and the
value of z predicted by the encoder
and perhaps this is regularized in some
way
and the predictor also has to influence
the encoder
so it's pretty clear that you need uh an
information
bottleneck uh between the encoder the
decoder otherwise the system will cheat
it will completely ignore x
you will be able to predict why exactly
by just cheating by looking at the value
of y
running it through the encoder and then
running it through the decoder and then
predicting why right that's just a
very simple encoder so unless you
restrict the capacity of z
the system will just cheat and not
actually train itself to predict
you have to push down on the information
content
of z so as to force the system to use
uh the information from x
okay to make the the best prediction
okay now we can use that trick to to uh
uh to train or forward model
because again a ford model is basically
just an instance of this
and and this is uh the
project that uh uh for autonomous
driving that
uh performance student michael enough uh
worked on
and uh alfredo has worked on this and is
still working on this project
and so here you're trying to train a car
to drive itself
and what's difficult to predict what
is what the car around you are going to
do so you place a camera
above a highway and you watch the the
cars kind of go by
and you can track every car and then
extract
the immediate neighborhood of the car
basically a little rectangle around
every car
that indicates where the other cars are
relative to the
to your car and this is what represents
represented at the bottom
um so at the bottom you you have a
little rectangle that's centered around
a given car
and then all the cars around are the uh
you know a little rectangular centered
on that car where the car is
in a standardized location in the middle
of that
rectangle you do this for every car what
it gives you is for every car a sequence
of what the cars around it are going to
do
and we can use this to train a forward
model
that will predict what the cars run us
are going to do
the question is if this forward model is
predicting all possible futures uh
irrespective of the action taken
yeah where we predict
a set of futures so given one action and
even
so given one initial state one action
and one cent one particular value of the
latent variable
will make a single prediction and then
you can vary the latent variable and you
will make multiple predictions
you can change the action of course
right
so i've redrawn the little diagram
i drew previously here here the the
state basically is a sequence of three
frames from this video
um there's no abstract state here it's
just the
the picture itself the blue car is is
our car and the green cars are the other
cards
so you take kind of three frames from
the past run this through this
uh neural net which attempts to predict
the next
uh the next frame okay using a
basically a big convolutional net as a
predictor and a big commercial
net as a decoder but there's a latent
variable here there's also an action
here which is not drawn
that gets into this
and the system also has an encoder
so it looks more like this
there's a and again the action here is
not represented but
imagine there is one so x is the
the past frames it goes through a
predictor that predicts a representation
of the input
and then that representation goes into
a convolutional net that the decoder
that predicts
it basically is combined additively
with a latent variable so it's added to
a latent variable
before going into a decoder that makes a
prediction for the next state
and the latent variable itself is
isolating variable but
is being predicted by by an encoder
which itself is also a convolutional net
it takes the past and the
and the future and tries to predict the
ideal value of the latent variable
now of course you have to restrict the
information content here and this is
done in this particular project using
sort of a vae like
approach where the um
i mean it's basically a vie with a few a
few tricks
so this is sampled from a distribution
that is obtained
from the output of the encoder the
output of the encoder outputs a
prediction for z bar
as well as prediction for variances and
z is sampled from the
from that distribution so it's not
optimized it's sampled
but there's also a term that tries to
kind of minimize the sum of the square
of disease over time uh which is the
standard uh technique for vae
and that goes into the decoder and so
this is trend as a conditional
autoencoder basically
there's another trick that's added to
this which is that
half the time z is simply set to zero so
half the time the system is told you're
not allowed to use z
just make your backs guess as the
prediction without a z
and that drives the system to sort of
really kind of use the past in sort of a
bigger way than if you just uh
have a noisy z if you just use the
standard the ie type training the system
basically ignores
the the past it just cheats it looks at
the
the answer why i will cover the rest in
a greater detail in a lab in a future
lab uh perhaps you want to
say something about the guns
because i will be actually going over
this the whole presentation as well
you are so gans are a particular form of
contrastive learning
okay so remember that uh when we talked
about energy-based learning
have data points
and our model
which i'm going to
draw like this
with a cost function it could have any
kind of
structure but i'm just going to draw it
like this
so this would be sort of a
reconstruction type
model right so imagine that the model
here is an auto encoder or something
like this
but you can imagine just about just
about anything
a simplified version i mean a more
general version of this would be just
y goes into a cost function and i'm not
specifying
what the cost function looks like okay
so what the cost function computes
is a in the space of y so let's say y is
two dimensional
is an energy that we want to be low
on the data and high outside the data
and here i deliberately drew a bad
energy function right so this energy
function is bad
because
it should be low around this region
where we have data
and it should be higher outside and
right now it's it's pretty low
in in this region right here
so we talked about contrastive methods
and contrastive methods consist in
taking a sample and pushing down on its
energy
and then taking a contrastive sample
which i'm going to draw in purple so
contrastive sample should be
a sample that our model already gives
low energy to but should not give low
energy to
we're going to push that up okay so
push up on the energy of this guy
push down on the energy of that guy and
if you keep
picking those samples and those
contrastive samples well
by minimizing some objective function
that wants to make the energy of the
blue point small and the energy of the
pink points high then the system will
will learn properly so
we've seen several ways of generating
contrasting samples the idea of
denoising autoencoder
which is to take a sample and basically
corrupt it in some way
we've seen the idea of
contrasting divergence which takes a
sample and then you go down the energy
with some noise and that gives you a
contracting sample to push up
um and you know we've seen
a number of other methods that are based
on prior knowledge about similarity
between
between samples but here is here is
another idea
the other idea is to use is to train a
neural net to produce
those contracted samples intelligently
and that's the basic idea of gans
at least in a form of gants that would
be called energy-based gans
you can do several formulations against
in fact there's an entire laundry list
of
various types of gans but the basic idea
of gans is is that
you you train your energy model so the
energy model
in the context of gann is called a
discriminator or sometimes a critic
but it's basically just very similar to
an energy model
and you try need to take low energy on
the data points
and then you train another net
neural net to generate contrastive data
points and you move their energy up
okay so the overall
diagram is something like this
you have a discriminator and the
discriminator really should be
not drawn this way it could be a large
neural net
but in the end oops sorry
in the end it's just a cost function
okay so it takes it takes a variable y
and it tells you it's good or bad low
energy if it's good high energy if it's
bad
so in one phase you collect
a piece of data from the from your data
set and just give it to
your discriminator okay so this is a
real y
coming from data
that's a training sample and you say the
output of
of that should go down okay i should
really write this as f
because after all it's just it's an
energy function
okay so make f of y
go down of course by changing the
parameters right
so you do w replace by w minus eta
df so f is a neural net
f is a neural net okay some primary
choice function but probably a neural
net probably a pretty complicated neural
net
okay that's the first uh first thing
and that will make the energy of data
points small okay
now there's a form of this that's
conditional so the form of this as
conditional you have
an extra input here which is an
observation
okay but you can have this or not that's
called conditional again
it doesn't matter okay second phase
or for contrastive samples uh
you have a latent variable z that you
sample
from some distribution a distribution
that's easy to sample from let's say a
gaussian
multi-multivariate gaussian
or uniform or something you run this
through what's called a generator
so this is a neural net and that neural
net produces
something similar to white okay it just
produces an image let's say for ir
images
and again you run this through your
discriminator
but now you want to make that
large okay
so in fact what i told you before is a
lie
uh you don't do this update like that
okay but here what you want is you want
to make
fw of this y bar high
okay
and what you're going to do now is train
the
discriminator and the generator
simultaneously
so you're going to first have to come up
with a cost function a loss function
and this loss function is going to be
you know some
um you know a summer sample
of a per sample loss function that
basically is a function of
f of y and f of y bar
where y bar of course is generated from
the randomly sampled latent variable z
now this cost function needs to be
a decreasing function of f of y and
an increasing function of f of y bar
okay
you can use just about any cost function
you want as long as
it makes for y decrease and it makes f
of y bar increase
or as long as it makes a difference
decrease f of y minus f of y bar good
example of this
would be kind of a hinge loss for
example okay
so something that says my loss function
is going to be
f of y plus
some margin minus f of y bar
positive part okay so this is a this is
a hinge
and it says i want to make f of y bar
smaller than
m um
other than that i don't care uh bigger
than m
i'm sorry i drew this backwards
so overall as a function of f
of y bar this function looks like this
okay so it wants to make f of y bar
larger than m okay so that's an example
the the actual cost function that most
uh the original formulation of gans used
basically plugs uh each of those terms
into a sigmoid
and tries to make the you know the the
sigmoid applied to f of y as close to
one as possible and sigma applied to f
uh y bar as close to zero as possible
it's you know it's basically that
nothing more than that so it's sigmoid
of f of y
plus one minus sigma eight of
uh f of y bar and
you you you take logs because um
i mean this is not the last function
this is kind of because before
the before the last function so this is
kind of like a cross entropy but
you have cross entropy that's positive
for the
the positive phase and sort of the the
target is negative for the negative
phase um
yeah i shouldn't write it this way this
is wrong actually sorry about that
but you put it the largest class for
each of those
so it's technically
you know log log of 1 plus exponential f
of y
for the correct one and
minus for that log f1 plus
e to the f of y
plus log
one plus e to the minus f of y bar
but you could imagine a large number of
objective functions of this type
okay so this is
the last function you're going to use to
train the discriminator
but the generator this is for the
discriminator
but it's going to be a loss function for
the generator and that's a different
loss function
and you're going to optimize those two
loss functions the same way
the one for the generator is is one that
basically wants to make the generator
produce
outputs that the discriminator thinks
are good but they're not
okay so basically the generator
um
uh wants to
adapt its its weight so that the output
that it produces y
bar produces a low energy
for f y okay
so you sample a random variable z you
run it through the generator it produces
a y bar you run through the
discriminator the f of y
you get some value and then you back
propagate the value
through the generator and adapt the
weights to the generator so that
this energy goes down okay so basically
the generator is trying to find a white
bar
that has low energy as low as possible
okay and it trains itself to kind of
produce wise
to have low energy again if if we're
talking about
conditional gains there's going to be
an x variable that's going to enter
those two modules
but that makes no difference in the end
so lg is maybe simply an increasing
function
of f y bar
i think we are kind of running out of
time we are
we have run out of time
so this would be uh some objective
function
of f of
g if g is the generator of z where z is
sample randomly
okay so you just do back up to this and
you change the parameters
of g let's call them u
so that this goes down now this is gold
this is called a game
in a sense that you have two objective
functions that you need to minimize
simultaneously and they are incompatible
with each other
and so it's not a gradient descent
problem you have to find
what's called a nash equilibrium between
those two functions
and gradient descent will not do it uh
by default so that leads to
instabilities and there is
tons of papers on how to make guns
actually work
that's kind of a complicated part but
alfredo will tell you all about this
uh tomorrow maybe you also you want to
mention the uh
the one with the sigmoid that creates
some issues uh
if we have like samples that are close
to the true manifold
yes and then i think we can close the
conclusion okay so let me mention that
so
let's imagine that your data
so again uh energy-based framework
your data is around some manifold
but it's a thin manifold so it's an
infinitely thin
distribution
okay in the original formulation of gan
the the gan the discriminator would need
to produce
zero probability outside of this
okay so it needs to produce zero
probability here
and it needs to produce on the manifold
in eastwood to produce
infinite probability
in such a way that the integral if this
is really a density estimation
in such a way that the integral of this
density over the entire space
is one and this is of course very hard
so gans basically abandoned the idea of
actually learning a distribution
what they want to do is produce zero the
original formulation produce zero
outside the manifold of data
and produce one here it's the output of
the sigmoid that
needs to be one which means the weighted
sum going into that sigma it needs to be
infinite essentially so it's not that
different
um and the problem with this is that
if you train the system successfully
and you get that energy function which
is zero outside the data manifold and
one on the data manifold
your energy function is completely
useless
it's useless because it's a golf course
right
it's flat so the energy function
basically that corresponds to this would
be the
negative log of that right so it would
be
it would be infinity here and
the minimum value of your cost function
on the manifold which for example could
be zero if it
if it's if it's an auto encoder the
energy gonna be smaller than zero
right um and so
it's a it's a it's a golf course of
infinite altitude
which is really not that useful what you
want
as i said before for every energy-based
model if you want an energy-based model
to be useful
you want the energy function to be
smooth
you don't want it to go to infinity in
sort of
a very small step you want it to be
smooth so that you can do inference so
that if
you start from a point here it's easy to
find
a point on the manifold that's nearby
using and descent for example
right so the original formulation of gan
leads to
first of all infinite weights in the
discriminator instabilities
something called mode collapse which
alfredo will tell you about
and in the end a contrast function an
energy function that's essentially
useless
so it's not ideally formulated so people
have
proposed ways to fix it by regularizing
the
energy function basically forcing it to
be smooth so one good example of this
is something called vessel steingans
proposed by martin arjoski who
just graduated from nyu
and leonardo 2 and a few other people
and and the idea of of that is to
basically limit the size of the weights
of the discriminator so that the
function
is smooth and there is you know various
mathematical arguments uh
in probabilistic framework but that's
the basic idea and there's lots of
variations of this
also questions about today class
it was dense but at least we were you
know answering every question
it was coming right through so i think
we
we follow along today um i wasn't sure
if maybe you
like explained it in a different form
and i didn't realize it's the same thing
but i was a little
um lost on what the policy network is
okay what that does
so the policy network takes the
estimation of the state of the world and
produces an action
and it's trained to minimize the
expected cost
of uh the state over the over a
trajectory but it takes just one action
okay
so right and there was a there was a
part towards the end where
i guess you drew a new connection
um right that uh from like
s to uh
where it goes down to
like connected through some module to
a so what is happening there so the
policy network
is the indicated by pi here on the
screen
so it takes s the state
and it produces an action
okay okay okay that's what a policy is
right you observe the state of the world
and you take an action i see okay
in fact a probabilistic policy is you
don't take an action you
give a distribution over actions and
then you pick the action in some way and
perform that distribution
but here you know you just have to take
an action
if the number of actions is discrete
then uh this this pi network
is this policy network is basically a
classifier and it produces a bunch of
scores for each possible action
and then you take one of the actions
probabilistically or deterministically
deterministically you
just take the action with the highest
score
uh probabilistically you can sample
according to
to the score and then you run through
your phone model and you keep going
okay so without the policy connection
then
then the action is just kind of it's a
related variable so you have to optimize
with respect to the latent variable to
find the to find its optimal value so
you have this
this kind of uh diagram now
where the actions are not produced by a
neural net
they there are latent variables that you
have to figure out
for every new every every time you run
your model you
you have to figure out what's the best
sequence of action to minimize my cost
and so you have to basically uh do do
this
for example by grading descent figuring
out the sequence of a that will minimize
the sum of the c's
over the trajectory that's that's called
model predictive control
and then um the one with the policy
network
um is is called uh
you know direct uh control essentially
um professor uh
you say that during insurance we need to
uh minimize
the energy to get the final value but
uh okay there are two questions one
won't it take too much time during
inference and
would be useful for real-time systems
and the second one is since it's
unrolled and you have to back propagate
all the way through the beginning yeah
have all the problems
that we face in uh recurrent neural
networks
exactly so presumably you're not going
to get the same problems as you have
with current nets because your forward
model
you know presumably implements the
dynamics of some real
systems so it might not have the issues
of sort of non-invertibility that you
have if it's a physical system it's
probably going to be
reversible so you may not have the same
issue as with regular recurrent nets but
uh but yeah you're facing this in the
same problems now
uh in real time situations
you you use a form of this called
reseeding horizon planning
planning
okay so receding horizon planning uh is
when you are in a
it's a real time situation uh your your
system will
run its forward model for a few steps in
the future
i don't know let's say a few seconds
okay sufficiently many steps to predict
for a few seconds that's your horizon
uh then you do this uh model predictive
control you know
by optimizing finding the optimal air
that minimizes your cost
your estimated cost according to your
model okay you know you haven't taken an
action yet
okay you've just run your internal model
to make that prediction
um so through optimization with respect
to a you find the sequence of a that
optimizes your cost and then you take
the first action
in that a and then you do it again okay
so with the a you talk observe the state
of the world now you have a new
state okay which you observe from your
your sensors and now repeat the process
run your forward model
a number of steps in the future optimize
the sequence of actions to minimize your
cost
take the first action and do it again
so it can be expensive if your horizon
is long if your forward model is
complicated
um and so that's when you need a forward
model
the the for a policy network so the
policy network basically
compiles this whole process into a
neural net that directly produces
the best action from the state okay
which may or may not be possible
but it gives you a good guess now
to give you a concrete example this is
an interesting series of books by
a nobel prize-winning economist that
lives in new york called
danny kahneman and he talks about two
systems in the
human mind called system one and system
two
so system one is the process by which
you take an action without thinking
okay um you're a very experienced driver
and you can drive your car without even
paying attention by you know talking to
someone next to you
you don't actually need to think about
it okay
system two is more sort of deliberate
planning
so system two is when you use your
internal model of the world
to kind of predict in advance what's
gonna happen ahead
sort of foresee what's gonna happen and
then take a deliberate
uh action that you think is gonna be
the right one according to your model so
it's more like reasoning
okay you can think of this you know
optimization with respect to actions
to minimize an objective as a form of
reasoning and we talked about this
before
so uh basically model predictive control
is when you don't have a policy you
haven't learned the skill
you know what your cost function is you
have a pretty good model of the world
but you don't know how to react okay so
a beginner
chess player would be like that you
you look at the the chase game and you
have to think about all possibilities
before you play
because you know you don't know where to
play so you have to kind of imagine all
the possibilities
if you are an expert player and you play
against a
a beginner you know immediately what to
play you don't have to think about it
i don't know if you've played
simultaneous games against
a master or grandmaster at chess
grandmaster can play
against 50 people and beat them in a few
minutes
because the player can go from just you
know one
opponent to another and just immediately
play just it's completely reactive
um you actually doesn't need to to think
because
you know they've kind of compiled that
if you if you want in their
in their knowledge of chess that they
don't need to think when you see this
kind of type of easy situation so that's
going from system two to system one
and uh when you learn the skill at first
you're hesitant and you have to think
about it
you know you're heads-up when you drive
you drive slowly and you look at
everything and you pay attention
and then when you are uh experimented
you you can just react really quickly
basically you've gone from
model predictive control to basically
training your own policy network if you
will
okay and in the process of doing this
your
uh your skill has gone from a sort of
deliberate
planned conscious uh
decision mechanism to a sort of
subconscious
automatic uh decision mechanism that's
what sort of acquiring expertise does
and that's that's how you go from this
diagram to that diagram where you have a
policy that directly predicts the action
without having to plan
okay got it thanks